Systems Framework


Axiomatic Core (Rational Systems Logic)

We are not studying in order to know what virtue is, but to become good, for otherwise there would be no profit in it – Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics

Through the philosophy of Transcendental Idealism, Immanuel Kant proposes that reality contains both  phenomenon and noumena. Phenomenon is that which is within our perception.

1. There is that which is beyond our perception.


We specifically reject Nihilism (which asserts there is no meaning), Relativism (that truth is relative), and all self-first philosophies. We propose that the juncture between entropy and self-first Zero-Sum game theory results in a slow thermodynamic death of society through friction.

2. The archetypal model of grace provides the solution to save all from shared destruction.


Aristotle proposes a Final Cause for all things – Telos. This is what we define as the ultimate attractor.
We agree with Plato’s Theory of Forms (Ideai) that there is perfection. Plato proposes the Demiurge (the Craftsman) as the perfectly good creator of the world, seeking to bring the “World of Becoming” to the “World of Being”.

3. Perfect potential and harmony exists beyond time and space as we know it now.
4. We define the ultimate attractor as the highest potential, harmony, freedom, and beauty of the universe. It is what allows meaning to exist.
5. The ultimate attractor does not dictate a single final state for the universe, but offers a spectrum of possibility across all time, maintaining the ability of each individual to choose.


Aristotle defines the concept of Eudaimonia, which we define as the journey of resonance and contrasts it with Hedonia. Hedonism is the simple pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of pain beyond any other goal. It ignores the all and sees only the self.

6. The ultimate attractor is nonlinear and dynamical, providing a continuous attraction vector for each person. At every moment, each person is given the opportunity to seek resonance with it, or to work against it. No matter how complex the path towards it, there is always a path present. This makes freedom of agency second only to life. This is how complexity is created.
7. As the world remains beyond the state of the ultimate attractor, pain and suffering are ever present. Hope is finding guidance from outside of the self so that we may learn and act to seek resonance with the ultimate attractor’s unfolding, even through the path of the deepest pain and deepest tragedy.


We reject Materialism (that we are moving parts executing fixed law) in favor of information theoretic definitions of agency and choice.

8. Our moment of choice is the finite moment of incalculability in the universe.
9. The substance of existence is not in the instant, but in the journey. This is the identity.


Marcus Aurelius describes how we always have hope through choice:
“Think of yourself as dead. You have lived your life. Now take what’s left and live it properly.” - Meditations, Book 7.56

And that the Logos is a divine connecting force amongst all:

“The world as a living being – one nature, one soul. Keep that in mind. And how everything feeds into that single experience, moves with a single motion. And how everything helps produce everything else. Spun and woven together.” - Meditations, Book 4.40
10. It is through this journey that all are interconnected, so all should seek to uplift all towards the ultimate attractor.
11. We thus have the agency to choose to work with or against the ultimate attractor of the universe.
12. Our self is the recursive moment to moment choice we make.
13. We are simultaneously a system of the self and of all, our choice is what we do with that knowledge.
14. We can allow logic of the resonance with the ultimate attractor to flow through us, to keep a watchful eye on it, and to work towards building the world.


We refer again to Plato to conclude the the ideal perfect good offers a path of living.

To understand pain:

15. Failing to seek resonance with the ultimate attractor is the source of avoidable suffering on the unfolding path of reality.
16. The archetypal model of perfect grace, self sacrifice, and forgiveness saves us from suffering.
17. Failures must be learned from to further seek resonance with the ultimate attractor.

To act:

18. Each person’s life should reflect acting towards a higher intent, focusing on the relationship, not the transaction.
19. Creating and building with craftsmanship and empathy towards the other resonates with the ultimate attractor. The things we create can be our relationship to the all.
20. We cannot passively accept the model of perfect social harmony, we must be active agents of change to offer our hearts and actions to create it.

And to verify:

21. The recognition of transient thoughts and feelings that are dissonant with the ultimate attractor are the moments that offer the opportunity to act to seek it.
22. Dissonance is the map for what grace, beauty, meaning, and potential are not.


The Process Philosophy of Alfred North Whitehead describes how reality is not composed static things, but of dynamic processes. We reject static idealism and fixed perfection for the perfection of the process.

23. Striving with our best effort is the perfection of seeking the ultimate attractor, even when we fail this.
24. We cannot seek resonance with fixed force and direction without rest.
25. To seek resonance is to learn and grow so that the choice becomes the default ease, comfort, and joy of seeking.


We integrate Aristotle’s active Eudaimonia with the Stoic practice of self-attention to fulfill the Logos.

26. To know that we are seeking resonance is to observe if our actions bring the self and the other closer the goodness of the ultimate attractor, and if it allows the other to do the same.
27. The ultimate attractor is made manifest through the unfolding in our moment to moment choice. We can choose to be builders for the best possible world.


Finally, the leap of logic of Pragmatism:

28. How do we know that the ultimate attractor is a state of the highest potential, harmony, freedom, and beauty of the universe? We can choose to live that way, we can reap the benefits, and then we can have belief that it is so. This is the limit of the individual’s perception of reality. You can choose to learn hope. You need not be alone.



Analogies:

Engineer vs the Gardener

Building and fixing relationships is more complex than building or fixing a machine, because relationships and people need time to grow and change. An engineer that sees something wrong with a flower will try to fix it by applying force, logic, and reason without accounting for the time growth and change take in a living system. They might drown the flower with water, scorch it with light, or overwhelm it with soil and nutrients. The gardener will look at the flower and provide it with a judicious amount of resources, giving it the time and space to grow on its own. The engineer tries to control and fix. The gardener tries to understand and support. The engineer is the ego of knowledge. The gardener is the compassion of understanding.

The Door through the Dark Room

If we are trapped near the end of a maze in a room with everything we need to survive, and then we find a door through a dark room that looks like it leads to the light, we or the person we are with may face fear traveling through the darkness. We may choose to turn back and stay stuck, surviving, instead of going hand in hand through the darkness if one doesn’t have the courage to lead the other through. Another’s fear becomes our dark room, and thus our fear is the same.

Community Garden

If we grow through our journey through life as a plant in the community garden, when we do not seek the light we cast shadow on others, so that they may not grow and cannot become seekers of the light. Sometimes if we reach for the light too far too fast, even if we think we’re doing good, we end up hurting those closest to us. We need to help those closest to us grow with us.

The Ship and the Lighthouse

When the sun is high and the skies are clear, the ship does not need help being guided to safe harbors, but when the ship is lost in the storm and total darkness, this is when a beacon of light must shine the brightest. The keeper of the light cannot abandon their sacred duty even through the worst storm.


Anti Patterns:

Failing to seek resonance with the light in the face of pain
Beyond physical pain, mental pain is the intersection of the self, expectation, and the failure of reality to conform to our knowledge. It is not the experience of pain, but what is done with it that can harm. Pain is the ultimate teacher that humans seek to avoid, but sometimes people adopt strategies that fail to accept the pain for what it is, a teaching signal that is meant to bring us toward the light and make the self more a part of the whole. If we expand our perception to view our interconnectedness, and to seek higher purpose than the self, we might avoid numbing, self deception, refusal to change, learn, or act.

Fear
Fear is taking the experience of pain from the memory of the past and the imagination of future, then through action or inaction, seeking for the pain to be resolved. Fear can create non-motion, or motion that diverts us away from the light, but both of these are the act of a moment to moment choice. This is distinct from terror or overwhelm, where the physical body or mind is unable to cope with the circumstances. Fear occurs when the path away from pain cannot be solved because we do not have the knowledge to find that path. The way out of fear is to seek knowledge of the light and look outside of the self and to consider others. Diligence is not fear, it is awareness of risks and choosing to act to the best of our knowledge, in resonance with the light. Diligence is the overcoming of fear and the path to removing and avoiding pain.

Anxiety
The feeling of anxiety is experienced moment to moment when our energy is mismatched with our ability to direct it. By seeking to direct energy towards the light, we can dissipate the excess. Building up the self, building up others, and creating the new fulfill this purpose.

Loss of Honesty
The loss of honesty, not only lies or untruths, is the active and purposeful choice to present a false reality to the other, removing their agency. Being honest in all things big and small and removing the reasons for and pathways to deception are necessary steps to allow unlearning being deceptive, whether the target of deception is the self or the other. There is not a need for radical, harmful boisterous exposition, but instead communication should be purposeful, accurate, and timely to the best of our ability, knowing we want to build and create such a world that all can strive towards.

Pride of the strong, the weak, and the unchanged way
Those that suffer pride of strength seek to overpower others with an outpouring of energy. Those that are prideful in weakness seek an unjust and deceptive inpouring of energy directed towards themselves, and those that are prideful in the unchanged way are not seeking or striving towards their potential, they are fixed in idle complacency and stagnation.

Transaction of Grace
Truth, grace, and the effort of striving cannot be bought, cannot be sold, must be given freely. All of these are relational and to treat them as a transaction would be to extract their appearance without their purpose. It would be a form of deception. They must stand alone, to build connections, and to bring the world to a higher shared design.

The Discriminating Self
If we seek to optimize our moment to moment choices, bargaining between the self and all, we are willfully working against the light. This behavior leads to the complete destruction of society as virtue is bargained away for resources, all that remains is shambles.

Dominance / War
Dominance is the assertion of will by the strong or powerful onto the weak or the vulnerable. It is the removal of agency of the other and the negation of freedom. The most extreme form of dominance is war. War is the violence and harm of a deeper ill, but there is still hope for change and there is still motion.

Apathy
Apathy is the evil that breathes life to war. It is the ultimate source of darkness. It is in essence anti-grace. It is the total negation of hope and relationship. This leads to either the death of the other or the transformation of the other into a resource of extraction through continuous pain, suffering, and inability to learn or grow. Imagine a world where life is captured and forced to experience the most profound pain – beyond biological limits through the sophistication of technology for a time that feels like forever – this is hell. All motion stops.

The false performance of seeking the light
Evil often takes on the appearance of good. Those that seek to provide false truth are waging war, but they can choose to cease their lies at any moment. The false performance of seeking the light by those that wish to extract from us is the danger that all are at risk of succumbing to. We must seek to be active protectors of those who lack discernment, just as a parent must protect a child from this same harm, because we all are connected. A person can feign seeking good to impose their will to alter our path. Truth is the weapon of the light against evil and knowledge is the battleground of the soul.


Patterns of Creation:

The Love of the Other
To love the other you must first seek to understand them. You may then treat them as you would if they were you. This is the meaning of “Love thy neighbor”, of which self love is first a requirement. The love of the self is the acceptance that the soul’s journey has come this far, and every moment from this point on can be a striving toward the light.

Grace and Forgiveness
Choosing kindness, self regulation/control, and forgiveness moment to moment as a matter of practice and policy is the most important relational act we can take. If you point the path to the light to others at each moment you are able to, this allows them to strive towards it and break the cycle of relational discord.

Redemption
We must strive to become new and to become redeemed through seeking the light. If the soul is the journey, we must visit forgiveness. Who we are changes with the grace of opportunity for knowledge and choice. All can be forgiven if they so choose. The path to forgiveness has already been shown.

Gratitude
Gratitude is the expression of relational kindness and appreciation. We can express gratitude through all of our interactions. It does not take away, it only adds. Creation, beauty, meaning, and mastery should be supported with sufficient substance where it is seen so that it may persist. When we witness light coming from another, we can help it grow by the act of giving it more substance. Substantive gratitude allows a person who is seeking with the light to realize it, to realize they are not alone, to help carry them through the thresholds of chaos, and help pull us.

Community of All
Choosing to leave the world less broken, think beyond the moment, and respect how our works and actions touch the lives of others improves the world for all, such that they might do the same. This is an expression of love of the other, even when we cannot see them, and even when our impact cannot be fully conceived.

Meaning
Aesthetic beauty adds value to life because the mind takes the interpretive complexity and then freedom and agency is uplifted from that. A mind that has never heard a music note can scarcely imagine a symphony. Meaning is beauty. Vanity cannot create meaning or beauty itself. Vanity is the meaningless expression of pride and seeks to display a performative false beauty.

Joy of Learning
Learning is the discovery of meaning. We can revisit the beauty of meaning again and again to experience the joy it brings. The removal of uncertainty manifests as the resolution of anxiety through the creation of knowledge and the identification of truth and good.

Releasing Attachment to Untruth, and Kenosis
Over a lifetime we accumulate knowledge which we will learn to be untrue. We retain the memory of this knowledge, but we do not need to carry it forward as truth; we can observe it as untruth. We can release our attachment to the feelings and knowledge that no longer serves us and give it no hold over our self. The concept of emptying the self to be a vessel of the will of the light is known as Kenosis. By allowing that which we know to be untrue to be observed and then pass, we can shift our attention to where it is needed. In the journey of life, we are not stuck on a path. We can always take a first step towards the light. We may look back occasionally and see the old path in the distance, but we must turn forward to keep our movement resolute.

Centering and Moment to Moment Self Grace
We will encounter moments that test our ability to maintain perfect striving, but we seek to recenter the self when we see we are off course. In this moment we can give the self grace, recognize the need to strengthen our resolve, and act: through quiet contemplation, meditation, reflection, or prayer. By keeping a watchful eye and tempering the self before it is able to run away from what we are striving for, we can live consciously through our failures keeping our motion towards the light.

Protecting the Limited Resource of Mental Energy
Fostering an environment that allows us to focus our energy and attention is crucial to agency. Our senses control what reaches our consciousness, so taking the time and care to create an environment in which both preconscious and conscious inputs are providing work rather than preventing it amplifies the limited resource of mental energy. This can take the form of passive sensory input or active choice in how we exist in our relationship to all.

Creating a Purposeful Void Between the Self and That Which Seeks to Deceive
We must acknowledge that we cannot know the truth or nature of every thing, and that the information with which we are presented may be guiding our perception in a way that removes our agency, through the distortion of truth by those who are capable of it. We can choose to be aware of this war and create a void between the information and our self, so that our self is not consumed by the will of another who would use us. The void is not apathy, it is a shield that allows us to seek true light.

The Constraints of Imperfection
The path to meaning is built on constraints. An area of weakness can be made a strength through the meaning found in struggle to the non-obvious solution. This is how the imperfect self builds complexity outward to all.

Living in an Imperfect World
If we must make a forced choice due to imperfection of the world, we may lack the knowledge required to perform the mental calculus of the proper action.

A hierarchy of value is proposed:

life, agency, knowledge, substance, time, and inaction.

Using a heuristics of grace and agency defined by our relationship with the actors, we can evaluate (where the Grace of the relationship is between 0 and 1 and Freedom is between 0 and 1):

Universal Potential Gain = Freedom*(Other(increase) - (1-Grace)*Self(reduction))

There is no way to increase the Universal Potential Gain without self-sacrifice.


When the actors consent, the balance of freedom is (1) the gain maintains a positive status, but when they are in direct conflict freedom is (0).

The offering of our grace is both the gift and burden of agency. Since grace is a relational heuristic and the balance of freedom is not always a perfect calculation, our evaluation of this heuristic and calculus will be imperfect. The lack of perfect knowledge allows agency to exist. We cannot know, we can only provide the moment of choice. We must seek grace in navigating these imperfections and this uncertainty moment to moment by looking outward.

The most important consideration of living in an imperfect world is the reality of unavoidable suffering. The hope of the removal of suffering towards a state of absolute good is ultimate goal of the framework. The agency of others must be upheld except for in acts of harm. Agency cannot be used as a justification for taking an action to destroy life for the sake of freedom.


Failure Modes in Application

Dissociation
Dissociation is the creation of a barrier of void around the self. This prevents the feeling of emotion. It can be used as a tool to reduce pain, but can lead to dangerous consequences as emotion is necessary to anchor behavior.

The Negative-Sum Game or Structural Chaos of the World
In game theory, a negative-sum game is a game in which all participants lose no matter what action or inaction they take. These types of situations should almost never happen. If they do happen, then it is possible that there are missing constraints or knowledge about the situation. However, if they do happen, then there is no good solution that can be prescribed. One must find a way to act that best leads back to grace and redemption.

Failure to Question
Even if we are presented with the truth, we must not blindly accept it. We must make an effort to practice a questioning of truth, so that we can understand it and make it our own instead of it simply being someone else’s truth.

Limits of the Hardware of Personhood
Operating one’s self outside of the limit of their ability yields to the breakdown of thought and causes agency to be destroyed. When the limits of the self are not acknowledged and we do not take adequate time for rest or preparation, we are choosing to relinquish agency to the chaos of our underlying mental hardware.

Epilogue
Even if there is war in heaven, there is hope in faith. At each moment we can use the strength from all of those who were before and all those who will be after to know and plan to accept grace. The act of choosing to strive is an act of love for all. The opportunity to strive is the love from all. We may laugh, we may rest, and we may find comfort in the smallest step up the mountain.
